# Summary of the book in 256 words

I set out to write a book for programmers about how to make better software. But I realized that the only way to make software better is to make the world better. So here we are.

Software inhabits a vast system of interacting, overlapping, recursively nested *centers*. A *center* is any cohesive organized structure that appears in spacetime. Examples include people, computers, apps, services, teams, meetings, processes, and companies. Improving the *whole system* of centers is both the motive and the method for improving software. Don't worry, we'll start small.

To improve a system, we start by removing the friction, waste, and suffering that occur when different centers of *mismatched needs and behaviors* interact. Examples of mismatches:

- a software bug implies a mismatch between the software's behavior and its users' expectations.
- a user interface where a common task takes too many clicks implies a mismatch between the software and the user's needs.

Fixing a mismatch always means improving the **interaction** by changing the **centers**. Sometimes, we change how an existing center works; sometimes we add or remove centers.

The measure of the system's health is the degree to which people are kind to each other, and own & care for their environment.

The improvement process must be made self-sustaining, or you'll burn out. You must therefore create a virtuous cycle of improvement. That cycle is kindled by relationships of mutual trust. People trust programmers when they deliver results; therefore, if you are a programmer, start by honing these skills: **test-driven and type-driven design, refactoring, and communication**.