Part of a [[GlassBeadGame]] I'm playing with [[NatBennett]].

In [[TheTimelessWayOfBuilding]], [[ChristopherAlexander]] calls the "[[QualityWithoutAName]]" a "subtle kind of freedom from internal contradictions". A building has this quality (which AFAICT CA renames "life" in [[NatureOfOrder]]) to the degree that it resolves the human and natural [[Force]]s that arise within it. One example given in Timeless Way is of a person walking into a room and wanting to sit down, but also wanting to be near light. If there's a natural place to sit comfortably by a window, they'll go there; if not, they have to choose between sitting down and being near a window, and that dilemma creates suffering.

My impression from reading [[TheMindIlluminated]] and observing my own mind is that suffering happens when [[SubMind]]s disagree on what action to take. E.g. if you're experiencing [[Pain]], but wholeheartedly committed to ignoring it (or dealing with it) then suffering evaporates. This is just me speculating, but I wonder if inner conflict is identical to suffering.

Bringing this back into the realm of [[SoftwareDevelopment]]—I am fond of talking about the "friction" or "pain" inherent in a process, or a way of structuring [[Code]], or some other formal [[System]]. Invariably, what I mean when I say this is that different parts of the system are in conflict. There is a kind of "turbulence" or "impedance mismatch" or "inefficiency" that hampers the system as it tries to fulfill its goals and evolve. I find it very difficult to put my finger on exactly what principle underlies all of the instances of "friction", because it seems weird to ascribe goals to a system that in theory has none. However, it could be that "friction" is just a specific form of suffering. If so, that would mean suffering or its absence inheres in the structure of informational systems, and can be perceived objectively by looking at that structure.