# Reading Notes: 2024-03-10

Stats: 13270 words

## General

- tall header and footer look awkward on mobile. Shrink them? Maybe make the font smaller too?
- split out a "meta-information" section for e.g. the preface and an overview of views, techniques, and principles?

## Preface

- needs more about externally visible results - good structure and sane development is important in part because it enables more reliable, performant, evolvable software.
  - "If you are interested in making software that **works better for its users**, is kinder..."
  - Good software (one hopes) brings in more revenue and is better able to sustain itself.
- "steady, predictable pace" sounds like "slow". But I can't make specific promises about speed. How to phrase this?
- I hope this book sparks "aha" moments in your work. "Oh, *that's* what Ben was talking about when he said X. I get it now." If that happens for you, I will have achieved my goal.
- Move "I have no Grand Unified Theory" to 36Views?

## Structure and Behavior

- feels unmotivated
- is there really a tension between structure and behavior? "Employers want the most valuable behavior they can get, and the most economical structure that will provide it" seems like a fine summary of the situation. Employers of programmers aren't trying to get behavior without any code. Too often, they incentivize the opposite.

## The Software System

- maybe this should go before structure and behavior. "There is a system of interacting people and computers that creates value for your employer." is a good intro to both sections.
- "These are all examples of changes to structure that affect the system’s behavior." the chapter on structure and behavior only talked about software, not about structure and behavior as properties of systems in general. This might be helped by reorganizing, maybe making the link go the other way?
- "Structure is what we can control, but behavior is what generates value." Good nugget, should be promoted.

## Humans, not Humanoids

- Link to David Rock talk as well.
- re: scarce resources - mention that stress and exercising willpower also drain these, so psych safety, kindness are also important (though Kathy covers this)

## Code is for Humans

- Depends on Centers - reorder?
- Reframe or remove this chapter? I think the intro sequence from the previous draft works better.

## Exploration, not production

- This page repeats the minified superfine example. Decide where that should go.
- Exploration, or figuring out? This page seems to describe two different views. Maybe split into two pages.
- is programming translation?
  - "translating requirements" - precise requirements often don't exist when we start to solve a problem. The forces acting on the system, and their ideal resolution, are part of what we figure out as we go along. Link to "controllability, not correctness."

## Forces

- "Just as in Newtonian mechanics, a system changes as long the forces acting on it do not sum to zero." what's the analogue of acceleration in this metaphor? Maybe drop the explicit comparison to physics.
- what about allostable systems? Are there situations where forces cause the system to cycle between structures?