# Economy

- Does it require expensive computers to build and run?
- Does it only run on the most recent operating systems?
- Do you need expensive proprietary tools to understand and improve the code?

A few decades ago, it was said that the cheapest way to optimize a program was to simply wait and do nothing. Hardware improvements due to Moore's law would inevitably turn too-slow programs into fast-enough programs.

This is no longer really true, for a couple of reasons:

- We are reaching the limits of Moore's law. The size of atoms limits how many more transistors we can squeeze onto a chip. The heat generated by electronic components limits how much we can increase the speed of CPUs.
- The software that most of us work on is consumer software, and most consumers do not buy top-of-the-line computers. Poor performance often means software isn't usable on the computers that people actually have.

The [Unix Philosophy](http://www.catb.org/esr/writings/taoup/html/ch01s06.html) has a Rule of Economy:

> 13. Rule of Economy: Programmer time is expensive; conserve it in preference to machine time.
>
> —Eric S. Raymond

What this misses, I think, is that in modern software development, machine time often _is_ programmer time. If development tools respond sluggishly, productivity drops disproportionately—an effect that's been known since the early '80s.

Making our programs fast usually does not require writing bytecode interpreters or compiling Rust to WebAssembly. In most cases, performance problems are not caused by code we've written, but by slow dependencies. Eliminating dependencies, or replacing them with faster ones, is one of the most important techniques for speeding up the development process. Another technique is replacing serial operations (including human-to-human handoffs) with parallel operations.
